CONTRIBUTING.md: Add detailed contribution guidelines (#300)
serokell/nixfmt: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contribution Guidelines

We welcome issues and pull requests at https://github.com/NixOS/nixfmt.
PRs that change the format should preferably be discussed in an issue first.

When contributing, please try to familiarize yourself with the [Nix Format Standard](https://github.com/NixOS/nixfmt/blob/master/standard.md), because the distinction between bugs in Nixfmt and issues with the format is relevant in many cases.

You can also reach us on Matrix at `#nix-formatting:nixos.org`.

## Contributing code

Most changes to the format are going to be implemented in `Pretty.hs`.
Sometimes, other areas of the code base need fixing (CLI, Parser, etc.) as well.
However, if you find yourself touching `Predoc.hs`, please open an issue first or contact us on Matrix.
That file contains the IR and the renderer, they are brittle and require expertise.

### Testing

There are no unit tests; all tests are end to end.
Tests are run with `./test/test.sh` when no changes are to be expected, and with `./test/test.sh --update-diff` otherwise.
The diff must be added to the commit that caused it.

> Our test suite mostly comprises of characterization tests (a.k.a. snapshot tests, golden master tests, etc.).

Reviewer: Uber nit, sorry:

```suggestion
Our test suite mostly comprises characterization tests (a.k.a. snapshot tests, golden master tests, etc.).
```

Or "is mostly composed of" might read more easily.

Author: "mostly contains" is even more to the point

### AST

The AST is defined in `Types.hs` (entry point type `File`).
Conceptually it sits somewhere between an annotated AST and a CST: It still uses tokens as primitive, however does not retain enough information to faithfully reproduce the parser input (as would typically be the case for a proper CST).

Every token is annotated with adjacent comments if present, and the line in the source code of the token.

### Pretty

`pretty` transforms each AST element into its IR by recursively walking the tree.
This is where the actual formatting logic is implemented.
Effectively, this is a giant switch case on all possible AST values, sometimes taking specific combinations of AST nodes into account for special casing.

### IR and rendering

*If you are familiar with [Wadler/Leijen style pretty printers](https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/wadler/papers/prettier/prettier.pdf) as commonly used in the Haskell ecosystem, this is another instance of them.*

The IR is defined by the `Doc` and `DocE` types in `Predoc.hs`.
It is a tree structure where the leaves are either text or whitespace and the intermediate nodes group the child nodes together.

> The rough idea is that "Spacing" in the IR can be either a whitespace or a line break, and which one will only be decided at rendering time.

Reviewer: I had to read this a few times. I think I understand it now. I misinterpreted "can be either" as "this is a union of 2 things, but each Spacing is concretely one of these things" , when really Spacing represents a deferred decision (IIUC). Here's a possible way to rephrase this. Feel free workshop further:

```suggestion
The rough idea is that "Spacing" in the IR will be rendered as either a whitespace or a line break. The decision is deferred until rendering time.
```

Author: I get your confusion. Does it help if "can be" → "can become"?

Reviewer: Yes!

> Typically, either all spacings within a group will become whitespace or newlines, depending on whether or not the entire group would fit onto a single line.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
Typically, all spacings within a group will become either whitespace or newlines, depending on whether or not the entire group would fit onto a single line.
```

I just realized: are we intentionally using the word "whitespace" instead of just "space"? To me, "whitespace" includes spaces, newlines, tabs, and probably other things I don't remember exist. "space" feels less ambiguous.

Author: you're right, I think I got these confused (and so does the code, IIRC)

We call this process "expanding" groups, and the rendering algorithm will try to expand groups from outside to the inside.

> This frees the Pretty phase of having to fit too much whether or a piece of code will fit onto the rest of the line.

Reviewer: Nit: "whether or a". Is this missing a word? Perhaps this?

```suggestion
This frees the Pretty phase of having to fit too much whether or not a piece of code will fit onto the rest of the line.
```

Although I'm not sure I am parsing the sentence even now...

We welcome issues and pull requests at https://github.com/NixOS/nixfmt.

When contributing, please try to familiarize yourself with the [Nix Format Standard](https://github.com/NixOS/nixfmt/blob/master/standard.md), because the distinction between bugs in Nixfmt and issues with the format is relevant in many cases.

You can also reach us on Matrix at `#nix-formatting:nixos.org`.

> 

Reviewer 2: This would be a good place to add a section on requesting changes, as discussed in https://github.com/NixOS/nixfmt/pull/295#discussion_r2069181392 and https://github.com/NixOS/nixfmt/pull/296#issuecomment-2840961011.

```md
## Suggesting changes

...
```

Doesn't block this PR of course, just pointing out that it doesn't  really address _that_ related issue.

Author: I understand your point, however I try to keep the signal to noise ratio in documentation as high as possible, to increase the probability of people actually reading it. This is why I don't mention things that are conventional or easy to figure out: The same way I removed the note on the autoformatter (we have a commit hook and if people miss that CI will complain anyways), we also already have an issue template specifically for requesting formatting changes.

That being said, I'll try to add a short sentence somewhere at the top. I don't think this is worth an entire paragraph.

Author: "PRs that change the format should preferably be discussed in an issue first."
